---
title: "Towards better chemical databases for atomistic machine learning"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2023-08-15-talk-3
venue: "ACS Fall: Harnessing the Power of Data"
date: 2023-08-15
location: "San Francisco, California, United States"
---

Machine learning (ML) has revolutionized the field of atomistic simulations. It is
now possible to obtain high-quality predictions of chemical properties
such as total energies, forces, or dipoles at a low computational
cost. Currently, the field is at a stage at which atomistic
simulations in the gas phase on the sub-microsecond time scale with *ab-initio* MP2 quality can be
carried out routinely. Given that the computational effort to evaluate
such a statistical model is independent of the quality of the input
data, the most significant bottleneck for devising yet better ML
models is the considerable amount of data required to train
them. Although the community consensus is that more data naturally
leads to better performance; it has been found that this working hypothesis is not necessarily correct for predicting chemical
properties with models trained on commonly used databases such as QM9
or ANI-1. Consequently, there is a need to identify how
to obtain suitable data for training ML models and for established
databases on how to add/remove information while retaining the best
performance of the model. 

In this contribution, we will discuss the use of uncertainty
quantification (UQ) methods for atomistic neural networks to identify cases
for which additional information is required or for which redundant
information complicates the prediction of a specific
property. Furthermore, the performance of different data augmentation (DA) methods like sampling from conformational space, use of Atom-in-Molecule (AMONS) fragments 
and generative models (graph and diffusion-based) will be discussed. Combining UQ and DA methods sets the stage for a workflow to obtain more robust and data-efficient 
chemical databases while retaining prediction accuracy.

See a summary and the presented slides at: [Here](https://doi.org/10.1021/scimeetings.3c10099)
